Add blog post on symbolic differentiation (#72)
reside-ic/reside-ic.github.io: content/blog/symbolic-differentiation.Rmd

---
author: "Rich FitzJohn"
title: "Symbolic differentiation in a few lines of code"
date: 2023-06-16
tags:
- R
---

<!--
Render original source Rmd with:

Rscript -e 'rmarkdown::render("symbolic-differentiation.Rmd", output_format=rmarkdown::md_document(preserve_yaml = TRUE, variant = "markdown_github"))'

-->

> We are working on [automatic differentiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation) of [odin](https://mrc-ide.github.io/odin/) models, and to support this we need support for differentiating expressions symbolically, in order to write new equations that can be used to numerically propagate derivatives of a model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are working on [automatic differentiation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automatic_differentiation) of [odin](https://mrc-ide.github.io/odin/) models, which requires support for differentiating expressions symbolically, in order to write new equations that can be used to numerically propagate derivatives of a model.
```

R already has support for doing this via the `D` function:

```{r}
D(quote(2 * x^2 * log(sqrt(x))), "x")
```

> and the [`Deriv`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=Deriv) provides an extensible interface. However, `odin` has peculiar syntax with arrays and we're interested in doing trying to differentiate through stochastic functions, so a bespoke solution felt useful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the [`Deriv`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=Deriv) package provides an extensible interface. However, `odin` has peculiar syntax with arrays and we're interested in trying to differentiate through stochastic functions, so a bespoke solution felt useful.
```

> and the [`Deriv`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=Deriv) provides an extensible interface. However, `odin` has peculiar syntax with arrays and we're interested in doing trying to differentiate through stochastic functions, so a bespoke solution felt useful.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and the [`Deriv`](https://cran.r-project.org/package=Deriv) package provides an extensible interface. However, `odin` has peculiar syntax with arrays and we're interested in trying to differentiate through stochastic functions, so a bespoke solution felt useful.
```

Symbolic differentiation turns out to be surprisingly easy, and quite elegant, to implement; this post shows the general idea.

> To start, consider differentiating the expression `x^2 + x^3` with respect to `x`.  Recall the mechanical rules of differentiation from school that we can write this as `d/dx x^2 + d/dx x^3` and then that we differentiate functions of the form `x^n` as `n x^(n - 1)` -- this is the primary insight we need; that the process is recursive as we break down every operation into smaller chunks and keep on differentiating interior expressions with respect to `x` until there's nothing left.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To start, consider differentiating the expression `x^2 + x^3` with respect to `x`.  Recall the mechanical rules of differentiation from school that we can write this as `d/dx x^2 + d/dx x^3` and then that we differentiate functions of the form `x^n` as `n x^(n - 1)` -- this is the primary insight we need: that the process is recursive as we break down every operation into smaller chunks and keep on differentiating interior expressions with respect to `x` until there's nothing left.
```

> The simplest possible differentiation rules concern numbers; `d/dx n` for any number `n` is zero (that is, the gradient of `n` with respect to `x` is zero. Similarly, for any symbol (say `a` but not `a + b`) *except* `x` the derivative is also zero. And the derivative of `x` with respect to `x` is one. With this, we have the edge case for a recursive function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The simplest possible differentiation rules concern numbers; `d/dx n` for any number `n` is zero (that is, the gradient of `n` with respect to `x` is zero). Similarly, for any symbol (say `a` but not `a + b`) *except* `x` the derivative is also zero. And the derivative of `x` with respect to `x` is one. With this, we have the edge case for a recursive function:
```

Reviewer 2: the diff is just a bracket after "zero" (it's quite hard to see)

```{r}
differentiate <- function(expr, name) {
  if (!is.recursive(expr)) {
    if (identical(expr, as.symbol(name))) 1 else 0
  } else {
    stop("not yet implemented")
  }
}
```

which we can apply like so:

```{r}
differentiate(quote(x), "x")
differentiate(quote(a), "x")
differentiate(quote(1), "x")
```

Interesting expressions are not supported yet:

```{r, error = TRUE}
differentiate(quote(x + x * x), "x")
```

To implement the case where we have compound expressions (`is.recursive(expr)` returning `TRUE`), consider the way we can represent these expressions:

```{r}
expr <- quote(x + x * x)
as.list(expr)
```

Every call can be represented this way - the first element is the function being called and the remaining elements are its arguments. This structure is recursive:

```{r}
as.list(expr[[3]])
```

> To apply our differentiation rules we need to describe how to handle each function (here, `+` and `*`) and put together the results, descending into the subexpressions with `differentiate()` again until we git our edge cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply our differentiation rules we need to describe how to handle each function (here, `+` and `*`) and put together the results, descending into the subexpressions with `differentiate()` again until we get our edge cases.
```

> The rule for differentiating sums is very straightforward, as noted above; we take the sum of the derivatives!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rule for differentiating sums is very straightforward, as noted above: we take the sum of the derivatives!
```

}
```

The `call()` function constructs expression arguments (so `call("+", quote(x), 1)` returns `x + 1`) and here we are descending into each expression with `differentiate()`.  We then rewrite `differentiate()` to call `d_plus()` when required:

```{r}
differentiate <- function(expr, name) {
  if (!is.recursive(expr)) {
    if (identical(expr, as.symbol(name))) 1 else 0
  } else {
    fn <- as.character(expr[[1]])
    switch(fn,
           "+" = d_plus(expr, name),
           stop("not yet implemented"))
  }
}
```

With this we can differentiate a sum of any depth:

```{r}
differentiate(quote(x + 5), "x")
differentiate(quote(x + y + x), "x")
```

We can then proceed, writing out rules for different functions as we need them. For example, the product rule:

```{r}
d_product <- function(expr, name) {
  a <- expr[[2]]
  b <- expr[[3]]
  da <- differentiate(a, name)
  db <- differentiate(b, name)
  call("+", call("*", da, b), call("*", a, db))
}
```

or the quotient rule

```{r}
d_quotient <- function(expr, name) {
  a <- expr[[2]]
  b <- expr[[3]]
  da <- differentiate(a, name)
  db <- differentiate(b, name)

>   ## da / b + a * db / (b * b)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ## da / b - a * db / (b * b)
```

>   call("-", call("/", da, b), call("/", call("*", a, db), call("*", b, b)))

Reviewer: I would have written this as...
```
call("/", call("-", call("*", b, da), call("*", a, db)), call("*", b, b))
```
which are equivalent - but I had to use a pencil to prove it to myself!

Me: (ba' - ab') / b^2
You: (a' / b) -  (ab' / b^2)

Author: Originally I had your form (which is what I was taught) but it turns out not to simplify so well and you're more likely to end up holding something silly like `x / (x * x)` which requires a more sophisticated simplification solution

  "(" = d_parenthesis)
```

and rewrite our `differentiate()` implementation again:

```{r}
differentiate <- function(expr, name) {
  if (!is.recursive(expr)) {
    if (identical(expr, as.symbol(name))) 1 else 0
  } else {
    fn <- as.character(expr[[1]])
    if (!(fn %in% names(rules))) {
      stop(sprintf("Differentiation of '%s' not yet implemented", fn))
    }
    rules[[fn]](expr, name)
  }
}
```

and with this we can differentiate all sorts of things:

```{r}
differentiate(quote(-2 * x / (x * x - 3 * x)), "x")
```

This is fine, except that the generated expressions are fairly ugly, with lots of obviously redundant expressions (e.g., `-0 * x` which is obviously `0` and `+ -2 * 1` which is just `- 2`). However, the expressions agree with those from `D` once evaluated:

```{r}
eval(differentiate(quote(-2 * x / (x * x - 3 * x)), "x"), list(x = pi))
eval(D(quote(-2 * x / (x * x - 3 * x)), "x"), list(x = pi))
```

## Extending the implementation by adding more rules

We could extend this easily now by adding more rules, and the implementation will even tell us what we need to add. So if we try and evaluate

```{r, error = TRUE}
differentiate(quote(exp(2 * x)), "x")
```

> we get told to we need to implement the rule for `exp` which is simply:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
we get told we need to implement the rule for `exp` which is simply:
```

```{r}
d_exp <- function(expr, name) {

>   call("*", differentiate(expr[[2]], name), expr)

Reviewer 3: So this rule means that the `expr` which is the second parameter to the `*` call isn't going to be differentiated any further so, that's going to make things a little different for expressions which contain other variables, which get differentiated away by the edge for all other rules (I think). So would they fail `eval`?

Author: This is me being slightly lazy because we could write

```
  call("*", differentiate(expr[[2]], name), call("exp", expr[[2]]))
```

which is how differentiation of things involving `exp()` looks, i.e., $d/dx \exp(f(x)) => f'(x) \exp(f(x))$ (see https://www.wolframalpha.com/input?i=differentiate+exp%28f%28x%29%29+wrt+x)

Consider replacing `call("+", a, b)` with something that will avoid creating silly expressions.  If given numeric arguments for `a` and `b` we should sum them, and if either of `a` or `b` is zero we should return the other argument:

```{r}
m_plus <- function(a, b) {
  if (is.numeric(a) && is.numeric(b)) {
    a + b
  } else if (is.numeric(b)) {
    m_plus(b, a)
  } else if (is.numeric(a) && a == 0) {
    b
  } else {
    call("+", a, b)
  }
}
```

The pattern here is that only the last branch gives up and actually builds an expression with `call()`

```{r}
m_plus(3, 4)
m_plus(quote(a), 0)
m_plus(quote(a), 1)
m_plus(0, quote(b))
m_plus(1, quote(b))
m_plus(quote(a), quote(b))
```

We can do similar things with multiplication:

```{r}
m_product <- function(a, b) {
  if (is.numeric(a) && is.numeric(b)) {
    a * b
  } else if (is.numeric(b)) {
    m_product(b, a)
  } else if (is.numeric(a) && a == 0) {
    0
  } else if (is.numeric(a) && a == 1) {
    b
  } else {
    call("*", a, b)
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: Just as a random thought, would the case `a == -1` not be nice to have too? you can do `m_uminus(b)` right?

Author: indeed. This is a simplified version of the rules in the real version:

```
  times <- function(a, b) {
    if (is.numeric(a) && is.numeric(b)) {
      a * b
    } else if (is.numeric(b)) {
      ## below here, we can assume that 'b' is a language expression
      times(b, a)
    } else if (is_zero(a)) {
      0
    } else if (is_one(a)) {
      rewrite(b)
    } else if (is_minus_one(a)) {
      uminus(b)
    } else if (is_call(a, "/")) {
      ## we have (a2 / a3 * b -> a2 * b / a3)
      divide(times(a[[2]], b), a[[3]])
    } else if (is_call(b, "/")) {
      ## we have (a * (b2 / b3)) -> (a * b2) / b3
      divide(times(a, b[[2]]), b[[3]])
    } else if (is_call(b, "*") && is.numeric(b[[2]])) {
      times(times(a, b[[2]]), b[[3]])
    } else {
      if (.is_unary_minus(b, TRUE)) {
        a <- uminus(a)
        b <- uminus(b)
      }
      aa <- .protect(a, c("*", "unary_minus", "/", "^"))
      bb <- .protect(b, c("*", "^"))
      if (is_call(bb, "*")) {
        call("*", call("*", aa, bb[[2]]), bb[[3]])
      } else {
        call("*", aa, bb)
      }
    }
  }
```

There's a different approach here taken with parentheses which applies some bedmas like rules to insert them where required which makes this a bit harder to read, but you can see more special cases here including exactly the one that you propose.

m_product(3, 4)
m_product(quote(a), 0)
m_product(quote(a), 1)
m_product(quote(a), 2)
m_product(quote(a), quote(b))
```

unary minus

```{r}
is_call <- function(x, name) {
  is.recursive(x) && as.character(x[[1]]) == name
}
m_uminus <- function(a) {
  if (is.numeric(a)) {
    -a

>   } else if (length(x) == 2 && identical(x[[1]], quote(`-`))) {

Reviewer 2: I think this is meant to be `a`s
```suggestion
  } else if (length(a) == 2 && identical(a[[1]], quote(`-`))) {
```

Author: you are indeed correct - this branch is presumably not exercised in the code for the post!

    a[[2]]
  } else if (is_call(a, "(")) {

>     m_minus(a[[2]])

Reviewer 2: Do you not just want to remove the bracket and do a unary minus here?
```suggestion
    m_uminus(a[[2]])
```

Author: yes, thanks - another bug! (the real implementation has actual testing, thankfully)

  } else {
    call("-", a)
  }
}
```

subtraction

```{r}
m_minus <- function(a, b) {
  if (is.numeric(a) && is.numeric(b)) {
    a - b
  } else if (is.numeric(a) && a == 0) {
    m_uminus(b)
  } else if (is.numeric(b) && b == 0) {
    a
  } else {
    call("-", a, b)
  }
}
```

and division

```{r}
m_quotient <- function(a, b) {
  if (is.numeric(a) && is.numeric(b)) {
    a / b
  } else if (is.numeric(a) && a == 0) {
    0
  } else if (is.numeric(b) && b == 0) {

>     Inf

Reviewer 2: Oooofff bold choice, no error? :smiling_face_with_tear:

Author: Try it and see (with `a` as any finite nonzero input)

  } else if (is.numeric(b) && b == 1) {

>     Inf

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    a
```

Author: :facepalm:

  } else {
    call("/", a, b)
  }
}
```

Finally, parentheses (this is done differently in our implementation but this is a little simpler):

```{r}
m_parenthesis <- function(a) {
  if (is.symbol(a) || is.numeric(a)) {
    a
  } else {
    call("(", a)
  }
}
```

We can then rewrite all our rules to use these functions instead of `call()` directly:

```{r}
d_plus <- function(expr, name) {
  m_plus(differentiate(expr[[2]], name), differentiate(expr[[3]], name))
}

d_minus <- function(expr, name) {
  if (length(expr) == 2) {
    m_uminus(differentiate(expr[[2]], name))
  } else {
    m_minus(differentiate(expr[[2]], name), differentiate(expr[[3]], name))
  }
}

d_product <- function(expr, name) {
  a <- expr[[2]]
  b <- expr[[3]]
  da <- differentiate(a, name)
  db <- differentiate(b, name)
  m_plus(m_product(da, b), m_product(a, db))
}

d_quotient <- function(expr, name) {
  a <- expr[[2]]
  b <- expr[[3]]
  da <- differentiate(a, name)
  db <- differentiate(b, name)

>   ## da / b + a * db / (b * b)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  ## da / b - a * db / (b * b)
```

Firstly, odin (via [odin.dust](https://mrc-ide.github.io/odin.dust/)) supports converting stochastic models into deterministic ones by taking expectations of the stochastic components; the underlying stochastic support already looks different to the call expected from R. So for example, we might write:

```r
m <- rbinom(n, p)
```

to represent a binomial random draw with size `n` and probability `p`; R's first argument (the number of draws to take) does not appear here.  The expectation of this draw is simply `n * p` and we can now easily add rules to our differentiation support to differentiate this part of a model with respect to any other model quantity.

The other tricky part we have is the way that odin interprets array expressions, especially those that contain sums, as these have specific semantics. For example, the valid odin expression

```r
lambda[] <- beta * sum(s_ij[, i])
```

could be rewritten as in something more R-ish

```r
for (i in seq_along(lambda)) {
  lambda[i] <- beta * sum(s_ij[, i])
}
```

> and differentiating the odin DSL version requires knowledge of this semantics. The solution to this is left as an exercise to the reader, ad possibly a future blog post...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and differentiating the odin DSL version requires knowledge of these semantics. The solution to this is left as an exercise to the reader, ad possibly a future blog post...
```

Reviewer 2: Ahhh "left as an exercise to the reader" continues to haunt my dreams to this day :fearful:
